.\" Copyright (c) 2024  OpenAI Assistant
.\" All rights reserved.
.
.Dd March 21, 2024
.Dt ZCK_CHUNK_STORE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm zck_chunk_store
.Nd export compressed chunks from a zchunk file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl q | Fl -quiet
.Op Fl v | Fl -verbose
.Fl o Ar directory | Fl -output Ns = Ns Ar directory
.Ar zchunk
.Nm
.Fl ? | Fl -help | Fl -usage | Fl -version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility extracts the compressed payload of every chunk from a zchunk
file and writes it to a filesystem hierarchy suitable for use with
.Xr zckdlfs 1 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
utility accepts the following optional arguments:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl q | Fl -quiet
Quiet operation; only display warning and error messages.  If
specified twice, only display error messages.
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose
Verbose operation; display some diagnostic output.
.It Fl o | Fl -output
Directory to populate with chunk files.  The directory will be created
if necessary.
.It Fl ? , Fl -help
Display program usage information and exit.
.It Fl -usage
Display brief program usage information and exit.
.It Fl -version
Display program version information and exit.
.El
.Sh OUTPUT LAYOUT
Each chunk is written as a separate file whose name is derived from the
chunk digest.  The path for a chunk with digest
.Ar abcd Ns ...
and hash type
.Ar sha256
is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<base>/<hash>/<prefix>/<digest>.chunk
.Ed
where
.Ar <base>
is the directory supplied with
.Fl o ,
.Ar <hash>
is the lowercase chunk hash name, and
.Ar <prefix>
is the first two hexadecimal characters of the digest.  The file
contents are the compressed bytes that appear in the zchunk payload.
.Pp
This layout allows the chunk directory to be copied to removable media
and later consumed by
.Xr zckdlfs 1 .  Use
.Xr zck_chunk_validate 1
to verify the integrity of an existing chunk directory.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
Populate a chunk directory for a previously downloaded image:
.Pp
.Dl zck_chunk_store -o /var/lib/zchunk/chunks updates/rootfs.zck
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr zck_chunk_validate 1 ,
.Xr zckdlfs 1 ,
.Xr unzck 1 ,
.Xr zck 1 ,
.Xr zck_delta_size 1 ,
.Xr zck_gen_zdict 1 ,
.Xr zck_read_header 1
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
utility was written by
.An OpenAI Assistant .
