.\" Copyright (c) 2024  OpenAI Assistant
.\" All rights reserved.
.
.Dd March 21, 2024
.Dt ZCKDLFS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm zckdlfs
.Nd reconstruct a zchunk file using a local chunk directory
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl q | Fl -quiet
.Op Fl s Ar file | Fl -source Ns = Ns Ar file
.Op Fl v | Fl -verbose
.Fl d Ar directory | Fl -chunk-dir Ns = Ns Ar directory
.Ar zchunk
.Nm
.Fl ? | Fl -help | Fl -usage | Fl -version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility fills the missing chunks of a partially available zchunk
file by reading the compressed chunk payloads from a local directory
tree.  The directory must be organised as described below.  This
allows transporting chunk data using removable media instead of HTTP
range requests while preserving the integrity checks performed by the
zchunk format.
.Pp
The
.Nm
utility accepts the following optional arguments:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl q | Fl -quiet
Quiet operation; only display warning and error messages.  If
specified twice, only display error messages.
.It Fl s | Fl -source
Specify the file to use as a source with the premise that most of the
chunks in the reconstructed file will be the same.
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose
Verbose operation; display some diagnostic output.
.It Fl d | Fl -chunk-dir
Directory containing compressed chunk files.  Each chunk is stored as
an individual file named after its checksum.
.It Fl ? , Fl -help
Display program usage information and exit.
.It Fl -usage
Display brief program usage information and exit.
.It Fl -version
Display program version information and exit.
.El
.Sh CHUNK DIRECTORY LAYOUT
The chunk directory is split by checksum type and digest prefix to
keep the number of files per directory manageable.  The expected
layout for a chunk with digest
.Ar abcd Ns ...
and hash type
.Ar sha256
is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<base>/<hash>/<prefix>/<digest>.chunk
.Ed
where
.Ar <base>
is the directory supplied with
.Fl d ,
.Ar <hash>
is the lowercase chunk hash name reported by
.Xr zck_read_header 1 ,
.Ar <prefix>
is the first two hexadecimal characters of the digest, and
.Ar <digest>
is the full chunk digest.
.Pp
The
.Xr zck_chunk_store 1
utility can populate a directory tree in this format from an existing
zchunk file.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
Rebuild an image from chunks provided on a USB drive:
.Pp
.Dl zckdlfs -d /mnt/usb/chunks -s old-image.zck new-image.zck
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr unzck 1 ,
.Xr zck 1 ,
.Xr zck_chunk_store 1 ,
.Xr zck_delta_size 1 ,
.Xr zck_gen_zdict 1 ,
.Xr zck_read_header 1
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
utility was written by
.An Jonathan Dieter Aq jdieter@gmail.com .
The filesystem chunk support was contributed by
.An OpenAI Assistant .
